feat: Expo Observe skills (#64)
expo/skills: plugins/expo/skills/expo-observe-metrics/SKILL.md

**How to interpret them:**

- **High TTI + low total delay:** startup is slow but smooth. Optimize what's blocking the launch sequence (bundle size, data fetching, initialization chains).
- **High TTI + high total delay + many slow frames:** main thread contention. Offload work and simplify the initial render tree.
- **High TTI + high delay + frozen frames:** something is blocking hard. Look for synchronous I/O, large JSON parsing, or blocking API calls.

## Data handling

### Offline collection

Metrics collected while the device is offline are stored on the device. They are automatically sent to the server when the app moves to the background, provided there is connectivity. You can also call [`ExpoObserve.dispatchEvents()`](https://docs.expo.dev/eas/observe/configuration/#dispatchevents) to flush events manually at any time.

### Data retention

Metric data is retained for a minimum of 60 days.

### Sampling

All sessions are tracked. There is no sampling applied to the data collection.

### Environment

> All metrics are grouped by environment. The environment value is derived from `process.env.NODE_ENV` by default, or can be overridden via [`configure({ environment })`](https://docs.expo.dev/eas/observe/configuration/#configure). Metrics with the `development` environment are filtered out before dispatching unless `enableInDebug` is set to `true` in your app config (for information, see [Enable metrics in development](https://docs.expo.dev/eas/observe/configuration/#enable-metrics-in-development)). You can also disable all dispatching globally using `configure({ dispatchingEnabled: false })`.

Reviewer: This skill looks like a copy of the docs. It might be better and easier to maintain to just link to the docs 🤔

Author: Claude's response: 

> Yes, there's a real performance gain from embedding: if [SKILL.md](http://SKILL.md) only links, every activation forces a WebFetch — adding latency, going through a smaller summarizer model that drops detail (specific thresholds like 17ms/700ms or the structured TTI interpretation rules can get lossy), and not cached across sessions. The maintenance burden the reviewer is worried about is real, but it's been one update over two doc changes, which is cheap compared to making every coding-time invocation of the skill slower and lossier.
> 
> A reasonable middle ground: trim the skill down to the actionable parts (the threshold numbers, the frameRate interpretation table) and link to docs for long-form prose — that keeps the high-signal content in-skill while reducing the duplicate-content footprint the reviewer is reacting to.
>

Author: I'll have Claude implement this change.

Author: Done

---
name: expo-observe-metrics

> description: Reference for interpreting EAS Observe app-startup metrics — cold launch, warm launch, bundle load, time to first render, and time to interactive (TTI). Explains what each metric measures, target thresholds (e.g. cold launch under 1.5s, TTI under 3s), common causes of poor values, optimization recommendations, and how to read the TTI frameRate params (slowFrames, frozenFrames, totalDelay) to distinguish slow-but-smooth startup from main-thread contention or hard blocks.

Reviewer 2: What do you think about making this shorter?

I think adding the exact target values in the skill description is not necessary, and may cause problems.

```suggestion
description: Reference for interpreting EAS Observe metrics. Explains what each metric measures, target thresholds, common causes of poor values, optimization recommendations.
```

---
name: expo-observe-metrics

> description: Reference for interpreting EAS Observe metrics. Explains what each metric measures, target thresholds, common causes of poor values, optimization recommendations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: Use when interpreting EAS Observe metrics or dashboards: what each metric measures, target thresholds, common causes of poor values, and optimization recommendations.
```

These should start with "use when" I believe

version: 1.0.0
license: MIT
---

# EAS Observe metrics — interpretation cheatsheet

Quick reference for reading EAS Observe dashboards and CLI output.

> Source: https://docs.expo.dev/eas/observe/reference/metrics/ — this is the canonical reference for metrics. Consult this page for the latest guidance, full prose definitions, optimization tips, and rationale.

> All durations are in seconds. Data is retained for at least 60 days. All sessions are tracked (no sampling).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All durations are in seconds. Data is retained for 90 days. All durations are in seconds. By default, every installation dispatches all of its events. Apps with high volumes can opt into per-installation sampling via configure({ sampleRate }). See [Sampling](https://docs.expo.dev/eas/observe/configuration/#sampling).
```

| Bundle load | `expo.app_startup.bundle_load_time` | **< 0.3s** | Yes (JS load + evaluation, before `runApplication`) |
| Time to first render (TTR) | `expo.app_startup.ttr` | **< 2s** incl. cold launch | Yes when root is wrapped with `AppMetricsRoot` (SDK 55) / `ObserveRoot` (SDK 56+) |
| Time to interactive (TTI) | `expo.app_startup.tti` | **< 3s** incl. cold launch | **No** — call `markInteractive()` once the screen is genuinely usable |

Both TTR and TTI are measured *from native launch* through the React render, so the cold-launch portion counts against them.

## Interpreting TTI events (frameRate params)

Every TTI event carries three frame-rate params. The pattern of high/low values across them tells you *what kind* of slowness you're seeing.

| Param | Definition | What it indicates |
|---|---|---|
| `expo.frameRate.slowFrames` | Count of frames ≥ 17ms | Main thread consistently busy during launch (heavy layout, sync bridge calls, too many components rendering) |
| `expo.frameRate.frozenFrames` | Count of frames ≥ 700ms | Hard freezes. Even one during startup is a serious issue (sync I/O, large JSON parsing, blocking network) |

> | `expo.frameRate.totalDelay` | Seconds of accumulated frame overage | Best single "smoothness" number — compare to TTI |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `expo.frameRate.totalDelay` | Total accumulated time (seconds) frames exceeded their target duration | Best single "smoothness" number — compare to TTI |
```

**Diagnostic patterns:**

- **High TTI + low totalDelay** → slow but smooth. The launch sequence itself is long. Optimize bundle size, data-fetch waterfalls, initialization chains.
- **High TTI + high totalDelay + many slowFrames** → main-thread contention. Offload work, simplify the initial render tree.
- **High TTI + high totalDelay + any frozenFrames** → something is blocking hard. Look for synchronous I/O, large JSON parsing, or blocking network calls.

## Dispatch caveats

- **Debug builds** (native debug OR JS bundle with `__DEV__` = true) do **not** dispatch metrics unless `configure({ dispatchInDebug: true })` is set.
- The `environment` tag (defaults to `process.env.NODE_ENV`) is metadata only — it does not gate dispatch by itself.

> - Offline events are buffered on-device and flushed when the app backgrounds or `ExpoObserve.dispatchEvents()` is called.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Offline events are buffered on-device and flushed when the app backgrounds or `Observe.dispatchEvents()` is called.
```
